The language has a flexible word order system. Variations are possible for emphasis or stylistic reasons.

However, there are several rules that cannot be used for some word orders:

- SOV / VSO / OSV / VOS
	- **Rule 1**: There is a nominal complement, and both the subject and the object are of the same gender and number.
- SOV / VSO
	- **Rule 2**: Subject contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- OSV / VOS
	- **Rule 3**: Object contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- SVO / OVS
	- **Rule 4**: There is a prepositional phrase whose affection is the verb.

With this in mind, there are several orders that will help you write correctly:

- SOV / OSV
	- **Order 1**: When there is a prepositional phrase that is not included to the subject and to the object, in which case must be placed after the verb.
- VSO / VOS
	-  **Order 2**: When there is a prepositional phrase that is not included to the subject and to the object, in which case must be placed before the verb.
- SOV / VSO
	- **Order 3**: When the object contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- OSV / VOS
	- **Order 4**: When the subject contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- SVO / OVS
	- **Order 5**: When both the subject and the object are of the same gender and number, so it can apply a nominal complement nearby to specifically affect; or when either the subject or the object contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.

# Topic and comment

To mark as the topic a noun, the postposition 'va' must be placed correctly in the initial sentence. However, if there is a need of a subject, after the postpostion 'va' the subject is placed, along with the postposition 'ga'.

By default, the subject and the topic are the same without using postpositions.

# V2