# Word Order

## Sentence Structure

The language has a flexible word order system. Variations are possible for emphasis or stylistic reasons.

| **Order**           | **Example**                  | **Gloss**                |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| **Default**         | _lo rexo lo-a arbor-a miran_ | The king sees the tree.  |
| **Object Emphasis** | _lo-a arbor-a lo rexo miran_ | The tree, the king sees. |
| **Verb Emphasis**   | _miran lo rexo lo-a arbor-a_ | Sees the king the tree.  |

However, there are several rules that cannot be used for some word orders:

- SOV / VSO / OSV / VOS
	- **Rule 1**: There is a nominal complement, and both the subject and the object are of the same gender and number.
- SOV / VSO
	- **Rule 2**: Subject contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- OSV / VOS
	- **Rule 3**: Object contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- SVO / OVS
	- **Rule 4**: There is a prepositional phrase.

With this in mind, there are several orders that will help you write correctly:

- SOV / OSV
	- **Order 1**: When there is a prepositional phrase that is not included to the subject and to the object, in which case must be placed after the verb.
- VSO / VOS
	-  **Order 2**: When there is a prepositional phrase that is not included to the subject and to the object, in which case must be placed before the verb.
- SOV / VSO
	- **Order 3**: When the object contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- OSV / VOS
	- **Order 4**: When the subject contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.
- SVO / OVS
	- **Order 5**: When both the subject and the object are of the same gender and number, so it can apply a nominal complement nearby to specifically affect; or when either the subject or the object contains a prepositional phrase or has a relative clause.

## Phrase Structure

### Noun Phrases (NP)

- **Rule 1**: DET + N
	- Determiners are always at the beginning of the noun phrase.
	- Example: the book
		- li libri
			- DET: li
			- N: libri
- **Rule 2**: DET + ADJ + N = DET + N + ADJ
	- Adjectives can either precede or follow the noun. 
	- Example: the tall tree
		- lo alto arbor
			- DET: lo
			- ADJ: alto
			- N: arbor
		- lo arbor alto
			- DET: lo
			- N: arbor
			- ADJ alto
- **Rule 3**: DET + N + PP
	- As preposition states, its best use should be always after the phrase noun.
	- Example: the cat on the mat
		- lu cattu in le tapete
			- DET: lu
			- N: cattu
			- PP: in le tapete
- **Rule 4**: DET + N + RC
	- Relative clauses must be always after the phrase noun.
	- Example: the man who is standing
		- l'homo quo esse standu
			- DET: l'
			- N: homo
			- RC: quo esse standu
- **Rule 5**: DET + N (+ RC) + PP
	- When there are at the same phrase a preposition and a relative clause, rule 3 and rule 4 are null. As such, relative clauses are marked by parenthesis, which indicates 'added info'; while preposition remains to the end of the phrase. However, if the preposition is in the relative clause, then rule 4 is not null.
	- Example: the man who is standing on the hill
		- the man ==who is standing on the hill==
			- l'homo (quo esse standu in li colli)
				- DET: l'
				- N: homo
				- RC: quo esse standu in li colli
		- the man, ==who is standing==, on the hill
			- l'homo (quo esse standu) in li colli
				- DET: l'
				- N: homo
				- RC: quo esse standu
				- PP: in li colli

### Verb Phrases (VP)

- **Rule 1**: V + NP = NP + V
	- Noun phrases can either precede or follow the verb. 
	- Example: see the dog
		- vide li-a cani-a
			- V: vide
			- NP: li-a cani-a
		- li-a cani-a vide
			- NP: li-a cani-a
			- V: vide
- **Rule 2**: V + NP + PP = NP + V + PP
	- Noun phrases can either precede or follow the verb. 
	- As preposition states, its best use should be always in the end.
	- Only is affected if the preposition is not included to the noun phrase.
	- Example: give the book to her
		- da li-a libri-a ad eia
			- V: da
			- NP: li-a libri-a
			- PP: ad eia
		- li-a libri-a da ad eia
			- NP: li-a libri-a
			- V: da
			- PP: ad eia
- **Rule 3**: V + ADV = ADV + V
	- Adverbs can either precede or follow the verb, but remains closely to it.
	- Example: run quickly
		- curre rapided
			- V: curre
			- ADV: rapided
		- rapided curre
			- ADV: rapided
			- V: curre

# Polarity
The word _num_, equivalent to `do` in English, can be added to emphasize, or to be marked.

## Affirmation

It is by default, and does not require any additional adverb.

| **Example**             | **Gloss**              |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------- |
| _Ego mira lo-a puero-a_     | I see the boy. |
| _Ego num mira lo-a puero-a_ | I do see the boy. | 

## Negation

Formed by using the negation adverb _non_.

| **Example**             | **Gloss**              |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------- |
| _lo rexo non miran_     | The king does not see. |
| _lo rexo num non miran_ | The king does not see. | 

# Question

Unlike other languages, as Lingua Latina serves the flexibility of word order, there is no alteration needed to make a question.

It is advised to also put the other question mark by using '¿' at the beginning if the sentence is long enough to be more than 1 line.

## Yes/No Questions

Formed by adding a question mark at the end of the sentence. 


| **Example**          | **Gloss**          |
| -------------------- | ------------------ |
| _lo rexo miran?_     | Does the king see? |
| _num lo rexo miran?_ | Does the king see? | 

## Wh-Questions

Formed by placing question words to the sentence.

| **Question Word** | **Example**    | **Gloss**        |
| ----------------- | -------------- | ---------------- |
| Who               | _qwo esse tu?_ | Who are you?     |
| What              | _qwa tu mira?_ | What do you see? |
| Where             | _qwe esse tu?_ | Where are you?   | 
| When              | _qwu tu mira?_ | When do you see? |
| Why               | _qwi tu mira?_ | Why do you see?  |

## Additional Wh-Question Words

|**Question Word**|**Example**|**Gloss**|
|---|---|---|
|How|_qwun lo miran?_|How does the king see?|
|Which|_qwen lo arbor?_|Which tree does the king see?|

# Condition

A condition is a sentence used in English to form conditional sentences. However, all zero conditionals are first conditionals. As such, in Lingua Latina there is no zero conditionals. Thus, only remains three types:

| type | condition                 | protasi        | apodosi                             |
|:----:| ------------------------- | -------------- | ----------------------------------- |
|  I   | possible to fulfil        | Present Simple | will-future or (Modal + infinitive) |
|  II  | in theory possible fulfil | Past Simple    | would + infinitive                  |
| III  | not possible to fulfil    | Past Perfect   | would + have + past participle      |


# Relative Clauses

## Relative Clauses

Attached to the noun they modify using a relative marker.

|**Example**|**Gloss**|
|---|---|
|_lo rexo quo miran lo-a arbor-a_|The king who sees the tree.|

## Relative Marker Variations

|**Example**|**Gloss**|
|---|---|
|_lo rexo quo miran_|The king who sees.|
|_lo rexo quo esse mirantu_|The king who is seeing.|

# Imperatives

## Imperatives

Formed by using the base form of the verb or a specific imperative marker.

|**Example**|**Gloss**|
|---|---|
|_mira!_|See!|
|_mira-lo!_|See (progressively)!|

## Negative Imperatives

Formed by adding a negation particle.

|**Example**|**Gloss**|
|---|---|
|_non mira!_|Do not see!|