---
tags:
  - en
  - alchemia
---

# Daltonism
## Law of multiple proportions
Near the end of the 18th century, two laws about chemical reactions emerged. The first was the law of conservation of mass, closely associated with the work of Antoine Lavoisier, which states that the total mass in a chemical reaction remains constant (that is, the reactants have the same mass as the products). The second was the law of definite proportions. First established by Joseph Proust in 1797 this law states that if a compound is broken down into its constituent chemical elements, then the masses of the constituents will always have the same proportions by weight, regardless of the quantity or source of the original substance.[^1]

[^1]: [Atom | English Wikipedia | 10 September 2023](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom)

John Dalton studied and compiled with other scientists experimental data gathered and noticed a pattern that later came to be known as the law of multiple proportions. In compounds which all contain a particular element, the content of that element will differ across these compounds by ratios of small whole numbers. Dalton concluded from all this that elements react with each other in discrete and consistent units of weight. Borrowing the word from the philosophical tradition, Dalton called these units atoms.[^1]

> [!example]- 1st example
> _**tin oxides:**_ Dalton identified two oxides of tin. One is a grey powder (which Dalton referred to as the "protoxide") in which for every 100 parts of tin, there is 13.5 parts of oxygen. The other oxide is a white powder (which Dalton referred to as the “deutoxide”) in which for every 100 parts of tin, there are 27 parts of oxygen. 13.5 and 27 form a ratio of 1:2. Dalton concluded that in the grey oxide, there is one oxygen atom for every tin atom, and in the white oxide there are two oxygen atoms for every tin atom. These oxides are today known as tin(II) oxide ($SnO$) and tin(IV) oxide ($SnO_2$) respectively.

> [!example]- 2nd example
> _**iron oxides:**_ Dalton identified two oxides of iron. One is a black powder in which for every 100 parts of iron, there are about 28 parts of oxygen. The other is a red powder in which for every 100 parts of iron, there are 42 parts of oxygen. 28 and 42 form a ratio of 2:3. These oxides are today known as iron(II) oxide (better known as wüstite) and iron(III) oxide (the major constituent of rust). Their modern formulas are $Fe_2O_2$ and $Fe_2O_3$ respectively.

> [!example]- 3rd example
> _**nitrogen oxides:**_ Dalton was aware of three oxides of nitrogen: “nitrous oxide”, “nitrous gas”, and “nitric acid” (these compounds are known today as nitrous oxide, and nitrogen dioxide respectively). Dalton understood that “Nitrous oxide” is 63.3% nitrogen and 36.7% oxygen, which means it has 80g of oxygen for every 140g of nitrogen. “Nitrous gas” is 44.05% nitrogen and 55.95% oxygen, which means there are 160g of oxygen for every 140g of nitrogen. “Nitric acid” is 29.5% nitrogen and 70.5% oxygen, which means it has 320g of oxygen for every 140g of nitrogen. 80g, 160g, and 320g form a ratio of 1:2:4. Dalton's formulas for these compounds were $N_2O$, $NO$, and $NO_2$, essentially the same as today's.

## Dalton's atomic theory
From the evidence provided by the law of multiple proportions, Dalton developed his atomic theory. A central problem for the theory was to determine the relative weights of the atoms of various elements. The atomic weight of an element is the weight an atom of that element is compared to the weights of atoms of the other elements. Dalton and his contemporaries could not measure the absolute weight of atoms — i.e. their weight in grams — because atoms were far too small to be directly measured with the technologies that existed in the 19th century. Instead, they measured how heavy atoms of various elements were relative to atoms of hydrogen, which chemists of Dalton's day knew was the lightest element in nature.[^1]
Dalton estimated the atomic weights according to the mass ratios in which they combined, with the weight of the hydrogen atom taken conventionally as unity. However, Dalton did not realize that some elements exist as molecules in their natural pure form — e.g. pure oxygen exists as $O_2$. He also mistakenly believed that the simplest compound between any two elements is always one atom of each (so he thought water was $HO$, not $H_2O$). This, in addition to the limitations of his apparatus, flawed his results. For instance, in 1803 he believed that oxygen atoms were 5.5 times heavier than hydrogen atoms, because in water he measured 5.5 grams of oxygen for every 1 gram of hydrogen and believed the formula for water was $HO$. Adopting better data, in 1806 he concluded that the atomic weight of oxygen must actually be 7 rather than 5.5, and he retained this weight for the rest of his life. Others at this time had already concluded from more precise measurements that the oxygen atom must weigh 8 relative to hydrogen equals 1, if one assumes Dalton's formula for the water molecule ($HO$), or 16 if one assumes the modern water formula ($H_2O$).[^1]
The flaw in Dalton's theory was corrected in principle in 1811 by Amedeo Avogadro. Avogadro had proposed that equal volumes of any two gases, at equal temperature and pressure, contain equal numbers of molecules (in other words, the mass of a gas's particles does not affect the volume that it occupies). Avogadro's hypothesis, now usually called Avogadro's law, provided a method for deducing the relative weights of the molecules of gaseous elements, for if the hypothesis is correct relative gas densities directly indicate the relative weights of the particles of certain elemental gases were not atoms, but molecules consisting of two atoms each; and when combining chemically these molecules often split in two. For instance, the fact that two litres of hydrogen will react with just one litre of oxygen to produce two litres of water vapour (at constant pressure and temperature) suggested that a single oxygen molecule must split in two in order to form two molecules of water. This also meant that the water molecule must be $H_2O$. Thus, Avogadro was able to offer more accurate estimates of the atomic mass of oxygen and various other elements, and made a distinction between molecules and atoms. What we now call atoms Avogadro called “elementary molecules”, and what we now call molecules Avogadro called “compound molecules”.[^1]
## Opposition to daltonism
Dalton's atomic theory was not immediately accepted by all scientists.
One problem was the lack of uniform nomenclature. The word “atom” implied indivisibility, but Dalton instead defined an atom as being the basic particle of any substance, which meant that “compound atoms” such as carbon dioxide could be divided, as opposed to “elementary atoms”. Other scientists used their own nomenclature, which only added to the general confusion. For instance, J. J. Berzelius used the term “organic atoms” to refer to particles containing three or more elements, because he thought this only existed in organic compounds.[^1]
A second problem was philosophical. Scientists in the 19th century had no way of directly observing atoms. They inferred the existence of atoms through indirect observations, such as Dalton's law of multiple proportions. Some Scientists, notably those who ascribed to the school of positivism, argued that scientists should not attempt to deduce the deeper reality of the universe, but only systemize what patterns they can directly observe. The anti-atomists argued that while atoms might be a useful abstraction for predicting how elements react, they do not reflect concrete reality.[^1]
Such scientists were sometimes known as “equivalentists”, because they preferred the theory of equivalent weights, which is a generalization of Proust's law of definite proportions. For example, 1 gram of hydrogen will combine with 8 grams of oxygen to form 9 grams of water, therefore the _equivalent weight_ of oxygen is 8 grams. This position was eventually quashed by two important advancements that happened later in the 19th century: the development of the periodic table and the discovery that molecules have an internal architecture that determines their properties.[^1]
Dalton's law of multiple proportions was also shown to not be a universal law. For instance, in oleic acid there is 34g of hydrogen for every 216g of carbon, and in methane there is 72g of hydrogen for every 216g of carbon. 34 and 72 form a ratio of 17:36, which is not a ratio of small whole numbers. We know now that carbon-based substances can have very large molecules, larger than any the other elements can form. Oleic acid's formula is $C_{18}H_{34}O_2$ and methane's is $CH_4$.[^1]
# Plum pudding model

> [!abstract]-
> The model tried to explain two properties of atoms then known: that electrons are negatively charged particles and that atoms have no net electric charge. The plum pudding model has electrons surrounded by a volume of positive charge, like negatively charged “plums” embedded in a positively charged “pudding”.[^2]

It had been known for many years that atoms contain negatively charged subatomic particles. Thomson called them “corpuscles” (particles), but they were more commonly called “electrons”, the name G. J. Stoney had coined for the “fundamental unit quantity of electricity” in 1891. It had also been known for many years that atoms have no net electric charge. Thomson held that atoms must also contain some positive charge that cancels out the negative charge of their electrons. Thomson published his proposed model in the March 1904 edition of the Philosophical Magazine. In Thomson's view:[^2]

> [!cite]
> … the atoms of the elements consist of a number of negatively electrified corpuscles enclosed in a sphere of uniform positive electrification, ...

Thomson's model was the first to assign a specific inner structure to an atom, though his original description did not include mathematical formulas. He had followed the work of William Thomson who had written a paper proposing a vortex atom in 1867, who had written a paper proposing a vortex atom in 1867, vortex theory of the atom, in which atoms were composed of immaterial vortices and suggested there were similarities between the arrangement of vortices and periodic regularity found among the chemical elements. Thomson based his atomic model on known experimental evidence of the day, and in fact, followed Lord Kelvin's lead again as Kelvin had proposed a positive sphere atom a year earlier. Thomson's proposal, based on Kelvin's model of a positive volume charge, served to guide future experiments.[^2]
The main objective of Thomson's model after its initial publication was to account for the electrically neutral and chemically varied state of the atom. Electron orbits were stable under classical mechanics. When an electron moves away from the center of the positively charged sphere it is subjected to a greater net positive inward force due to the presence of more positive charge inside its orbit. Electrons were free to rotate in rings that were further stabilized by interactions among the electrons, and spectroscopic measurements were meant to account for energy differences associated with different electron rings. As for the properties of matter, Thomson believed they arose from electrical effects. He further emphasized the need for a theory to help picture the physical and chemical aspects of an atom using the theory of corpuscles and positive charge. Thomson attempted unsuccessfully to reshape his model to account for some of the major spectral lines experimentally known for several elements. After the scientific discovery of radioactivity, Thomson decided to address it in his model by stating:[^2]

> … we must face the problem of the constitution of the atom, and see if we can imagine a model which has in it the potentiality of explaining the remarkable properties shown by radio-active substances …

Thomson's model changed over the course of its initial publication, finally becoming a model with much more mobility, containing electrons revolving in the dense field of positive charge rather than a static structure. Despite this, the colloquial nickname “plum pudding” was soon attributed to Thomson's model as the distribution of electrons within its positively charged region of space reminded many scientists of raisins, then called “plums”, in the common English dessert, plum pudding.[^2]
# Rutherford model
## Discovery of the nucleus
In 1909, Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden conducted experiments where alpha particles were fire through thin sheets of gold. Their professor, Ernest Rutherford, expected to find results consistent with Thomson's atomic model. However, when the results were published in 1911, they doubt after they encountered difficulties when they tried to build an instrument to measure the charge-to-mass ratio of alpha particles (these are positively-charged particles emitted by certain radioactive substances such as radium) and instead implied the presence of a very small nucleus of positive charge at the centre of each gold atom. This led to the development of the Rutherford model of the atom. Immediately after Rutherford published his results, Antonius van den Broek made the intuitive proposal that the atomic number of an atom is the total number of units of charge present in its nucleus. Henry Moseley's 1913 experiments provided the necessary evidence to support Van den Broek's proposal. The effective nuclear charge was found to be consistent with the atomic number (Moseley found only one unit of charge difference). This work culminated in the solar-system-like Bohr model of the atom in the same year, in which a nucleus containing an atomic number of positive charges is surrounded by an equal number of electrons in orbital shells. As Thomson's model guided Rutherford's experiments, Bohr's model guided Moseley's research. The Bohr model was elaborated upon during the time of the “old quantum theory”, and then subsumed by the full-fledged development of quantum mechanics.[^2]
# Rutherford-Bohr model
Between 1908 and 1913, Rutherford and his colleagues performed a series of experiments in which they bombarded thin foils of metal with alpha particles. They spotted alpha particles being deflected by angles greater than 90°. To explain this, Rutherford proposed that the positive charge of the atom is not distributed throughout the atom's volume as Thomson believed, but is concentrated in a tiny nucleus at the centre. Only such an intense concentration of charge could produce an electric field strong enough to deflect the alpha particles as observed. Rutherford's model is sometimes called the “planetary model”. However, Hantaro Nagaoka was quoted by Rutherford as the first to suggest a planetary atom in 1904. And planetary models had been suggested as early as 1897 such as the one by Josep Larmor. And planetary models had been suggested as early as 1897 such as the one by Ludwig August Colding in 1854 whose idea was that atoms were analogous to planetary systems that rotate and cause magnetic polarity.[^2]
The planetary model of the atom had two significant shortcomings. The first is that, unlike planets orbiting a sun, electrons are charged particles. An accelerating electric charge is known to emit electromagnetic waves according to the Larmor formula in classical electromagnetism. An orbiting charge should staedily lose energy and spiral toward the nucleus, colliding with it in a small fraction of a second. The second problem was that the planetary mdel could not explain the highly peaked emission and absorption spectra of atoms that were observed.
Quantum theory revolutionized physics at the beginning of the 20th century, when Max Planck and Albert Einstein postulated that light energy is emittted or absorbed in discrete amounts known as quanta. This led to a series of quantum atomic models such as the quantum model of Arthur Erich Haas in 1910 and the 1912 John William Nicholson quantum atomic model that quantized angular momentum as $\frac{h}{2\pi}$. In 1913, Niels Bohr incorporated this idea into his Bohr model of the atom, in which an electron could only orbit the nucleus in particular circular orbits with fixed angular momentum and energy, its distance from the nucleus because it could not lose energy in a continuous manner; instead, it could only
# Bohr-Sommerfeld
# Quantum-Wave model